Explore the Spokane River — Return to M^'Gillivray^s River 
— Canoes start — David Thompson^ James M'^Millan, and 
one man start with sixteen horses — Arrive at carrying 
place of Saleesh River — Arrive at M^Gillivray^s carry- 
ing place — Tracks of Peeagans — Cache at carrying place 
of the Mou7itains broken into by a Wolverene — Start 
out to meet fresh horses from the East of the Mountains — 
Embark on the Saskatchezua7i — Arrive at the ruins of 
Fort Augustus — Proceed on journey of descending the 
Saskatchewan — Cumberland House — Pemican — Missasscut 
berry — Cedar Lake — Saskatchewan River — Arrive at 
Rainy Lake House — Woman conjuress. 

y4PRIL. Various duties for the Voyage before us, got 
/ % the Canoe ready and sent off to the Kullyspel Lake 
^ m. with Furrs and Provisions, the weather variable, but 
very mild. April 9'^. 5 am +38 2 pm +52 9 pm +42 
small Rain. April 18'^. 5 am +38 Clear 2 pm +71 hazy. 
9 PM +38 calm. Getting all ready to set off the morrow 
19"". We left the House to proceed on our Voyage to ex- 
change the Furrs for Goods &c. The 25'^ part of this day 
was passed in observations for Latitude Longitude and Varia- 
tion of the Compass, of no use to the general reader. The 
same on the 26'^, when we had the good fortune to kill one 

Crane, thirteen Geese and one Duck. April 27"' proceeded 

426 



JOURNEY TO RAINY LAKE HOUSE 427 

on discovery down the Spokane River ^ till 2.25 pm, when 
finding the River bounded by high craigs, of contracted 
space, with strong rushes of current, small Falls, and Whirl- 
pools, we put ashore to examine the country below us. Of 
late a great change had taken place, the remains of the heavy- 
snows of Winter, which is very deep in these countries, is 
everywhere on the ground giving everything a wintry appear- 
ance ; we landed on the left side which appeared the best, 
went up a high steep bank of rocks and earth, and then 
through small, close woods, for one mile in deep snow, which 
sometimes bore us up, but often [we] sunk in it to our middle ; 
we were obliged to haul ourselves out by the branches of the 
Trees. Having crossed the Carrying Place," we had a steep 
bank to go down ; from the top I surveyed the country 
before me, with the assistance of the Indian ; a bold range 
of high Mountains covered with snow bounded the left side 
of the River, and also formed it's banks in rude craigs : the 
right side was of high steep Hills of rock, and ranged away 
to a great distance. My Guide who has been here pointed 
out the country ; about three miles below us was a Fall 
that fell over steep Rocks, the height of a large tree (say 
80 to 100 feet) but could not be approached in this season, 
the Snow was too deep ; in the Summer they left the Canoes 
a short distance above the Fall, and by hands and feet got 
along the steep Rocks to the Fall, beyond which no Indian 
had ever gone, except a very few to gather red ochre, which 
is of a very fine quality, and in great plenty among the Moun- 

1 This is a mistake for the Pend d'Oreille river. [T. C. E.] 
=* Thompson has descended the Pend d'Oreille (not the Spokane) 
river a little farther than before, and is on the edge of Box Cafion above 
Metaline (formerly Pend d'Oreille) Falls. He is actually within thirty 
miles of the Columbia river, but in a very rough country which even the 
Indians avoided in their travel. Later, in 1825, employees of the Hudson's 
Bay Company, under the direction of Governor Simpson, explored this 
river from where it empties into the Columbia, but soon abandoned any 
attempt to navigate it. [T. C. E.] 



428 DAVID THOMPSON'S NARRATIVE 

tains. The road he described as highly dangerous, passable 
only to light, active, men, and they [are] obliged frequently 
to go on hands and knees, and thus get up the high steep 
rocks ; which he assured us continued for two and a half 
days march beyond the great Fall ; when they came on the 
Columbia River. The Spokane River for this distance is a 
terrible Cataract, bounded on each side by high Craigs, and 
unnavigable ; those who voyage this way make a long carrying 
place ^ to a small River which runs nearly paralel to the 
Columbia, and falls into it below the Cataract ; this River 
he said to be too shoal for us. Although so near the Great 
Falls, he assured us, it would take a whole day to arrive 
there, including the Carrying Place we were on ; this I 
readily believed, as the Carrying Place alone would require 
four hours of active men. This range of rude, high, rocky 
Hills gave me a view of the structure of the country which I 
had not [had] before. I never to myself, could account for the 
small quantity of Snow at the west foot of the Mountains along 
the whole of the Kootanae and Saleesh countries for the length 
of about 400 miles ; these high Hills intercepted all the 
heavy vapours from the Pacific Ocean, and the great valley 
between them and the west foot of the mountains have only 
the light vapours which pass above these Hills ; the breadth 
of this fine valley is irregular, and may be estimated at one 
hundred miles ; the depth of snow on these Hills in Winter 
must be very great ; when we found so much, so late in the 
season, after such heavy thaws. I now perceived the Columbia 
River was in a deep valley at the north end of these rude 
Hills, and it's west side the high rolling lands of Amount Nelson, 
round which it runs. Attentively surveying the country, 

^ The customary Indian trail to and from the Cohimbia left the Pend 
d'Oreille at the Calispell river, crossed the mountains on the westward 
to the valley of the Colville river, and followed that river (which is not 
navigable for canoes) to the Columbia just below the Kettle Falls, which 
Thompson here refers to as the " Cataract," or " Great Falls." The name 
Ilthkoyape was not yet used by him. [T. C. E.] 
