TWO canoes of Chippaway Indians came to us on their way to the

Red Cedar Lake ; As my Canoe from coming too often in contact

with the ice was Leaky I embarked with them to the Red Cedar

Lake. From the SW corner of the Turtle Lake a Brook goes out, by

the name of the Turtle Brook of three yards in width by two feet

in depth at 2i miles p" hour, but so very winding, that rather

than follow it we made a Carrying Place of i8o yards, to a small

Lake which sends a Brook into it, and which we followed, and then

continued the main stream following its incredible windings and

turnings through apparently an extensive very low country of

grass and marsh. There were three Falls, along which we made as

many carrying places, and several rapids over a gravel bottom ;

As we proceeded several Brooks came in from each hand, and we

entered the Red Cedar Lake in a fine Stream of fifteen yards in

width by two feet in depth, and three miles an hour. Pro­ ceeding

five miles over the Lake we came to the trading house of M' John

Sayer, a Partner of the North West Company, and in charge of this

Department. By my Observations this House is in Latitude 47 . 27

. 56 N Longitude 94. . 47 . 52 West Variation 6 degrees East.

From the north bank of Turtle Lake to this trading house the

course and distance S 58 E 25 Miles, but the windings of the

River will more than treble this distance. The Stream has a

grassy valley in which it holds it's zigzag course ; this land is

very low. The Woods on each side of the Valley are of Oak, Ash,

Elm, Larch, Birch, Pines, Aspins and where a little elevated fine

Maple. The soil every where deep and rich with abundance of long

grass. The Brooks and Ponds and the Turtle Rivulet almost from

side to side full of the Stalks of the Wild Rice, which makes it

very laborious to come against the current, as the canoe must

keep the middle of the stream against the full force of the

current. M' Sayer and his Men had passed the whole winter on wild

rice and maple sugar, which keeps them aHve, but poor in flesh :

Being a good shot on the wing I had killed twenty large Ducks

more than we wanted, which I gave to him a most welcome present,

as they had not tasted meat for a long time. A mess of rice and

sugar was equally acceptable to me who had lived wholly on meat ;

and I tried to hve upon it, but the third day was attacked with

heart burn and weakness of the stomach, which two meals of meat

cured ; but the rice makes good soup. From the remarks I have

made in the vicissitudes of my Hfe, I have always found that

Now known as Cass lake. John Sayer was one of the wintering

partners who signed the agree­ ment of 1804 consolidating the

North­West and X Y Companies. His house at this time was on the

north­east side of Cass lake. Betula papyrifera Marsh.

Acer saccharum Marsh. men leading an active life readily

change their food from vegetable to animal without inconvenience,

but not from animal to vegetable, the latter often attended with

weakness of the bowels. The wild Rice is fully ripe in the

early part of September. The natives lay thin birch rind all over

the bottom of the Canoe, a man lightly clothed, or naked places

himself in the middle of the Canoe, and with a hand on each side,

seizes the stalks and knocks the ears of rice against the inside

of the Canoe, into which the rice falls, and thus he continues

until the Canoe is full of rice ; on coming ashore the Women

assist in unloading. A canoe may hold from ten to twelve

bushels. He smokes his pipe, sings a Song ; and returns to

collect another canoe load. And so plentifuU is the rice, an

industrious Man may fill his canoe three times in a day.

Scaffolds are prepared about six feet from the ground made of

small sticks covered with long grass ; on this the rice is laid,

and gentle clear fires kept underneath by the women, and turned

until the rice is fully dried. The quantity collected is no more

than the scaffolds can dry, as the rice is better on the stalk

than on the ground. The rice when dried is pounded in a mortar

made of a piece of hollow oak with a pestle of the same until the

husk comes off. It is then put up in bags made of rushes and

secured against animals. The Natives collect not only enough for

themselves, but also as much as the furr traders will buy from

them ; Two or three Ponds of water can furnish enough for all

that is collected. In the Spring the Natives employ themselves

in making Sugar from the Maple Trees, the process of doing which

is well known. The old trees give a stronger sap than the young

trees ; The Canadians also make a great quantity, which, when the

sap is boiled to a proper consistence, they run into moulds where

it hardens. But the Indians prefer making it like Muscovado

sugar, this is done simply by stirring it quickly about with a

small paddle. The Plane Tree also makes a good sugar, the sap is

abundant, and the sugar whiter, but not so strong. Both sugars

have a taste, which soon becomes agreeable, and as fine white

loaf sugar can be made from it as from that of the West Indies.

The natives would make far more than they do, if they could find

a Market. The men of family that trade at this House are about

Sixty, and M' Sayer, who has been in the Furr Trade many years,

is of opinion that seven persons to a family is about a fair

average. This will give 420 souls. The Natives here call

themselves " Oochepoys " and for some few years have begun to

give something like a right of property to each family on the

sugar maple groves, and which right continues in the family to

the exclusion of others. But as this appropriated space is small

in comparison of the whole extent ; any, and every person is free

to make sugar on the vacant grounds. The appropriation was made

by them in a council, in order to give to each family a full

extent of ground for making sugar, and to prevent the disputes

that would arise where all claim an equal right to the soil and

it's productions. And as in the making of sugar, several kettles

and many small vessels of wood and birch rind for collecting and

boiling the sap are required, which are not wanted for any other

purpose, they are thus left in safety on their own grounds

for future use. Our Canoe being in very bad order from rough

usage among the ice M"" Sayer purchased a good canoe for us for

the value of twenty beaver skins in goods and our Canoe. It was

my intention to have gone a considerable distance down the River,

but M" Sayer strongly advised me to go no further than to

Sand Lake River, as beyond we should be in the power of the Sieux

Indians. On the third day of May Thompson evidently refers to

the Ash­leaved Maple, Acer negundo Linn. This tree bears

considerable resemblance to the False Plane, Acer pseudo­platanus

Linn., the " Plane Tree " of Scotland. Another form of the

name Ojibway. we took leave of our kind host ; our provisions

were wild rice and maple sugar, with powder and shot for ducks.

One mile beyond the house we entered the River, now augmented to

twenty six yards in width by three feet in depth, at two miles an

hour. The valley of the Mississippe lay now clear before me, it's

direction South East ; it's appearance was that of a meadow of

long half dried grass without water of about half a mile in

width, or less. On the left side points of wood came to the edge

of this valley, but not into it, at a mile, or a mile and a half

from each other, the intervals were bays of hay marsh. On the

right hand the Hne of Woods was more regular ; Being well

experienced in taking levels, the Valley of the River before us

showed a declining plane of full twenty p" mile for the first

three miles ; this would give a current which no boat could

ascend ; but this was com­ pletely broken down by the innumerable

turnings of the River to every point of the compass. Seeing a

Pole before us at less than five hundred yards the four hands in

the canoe paddled smartly for thirty five minutes before a

current of 2i miles an hour to arrive at it, in which time we

estimated we had passed over about three miles of the windings of

the River. Meeting an Indian in his canoe ascending the River,

he smoked with us, and on my remarking to him the crooked­ ness

of the River, he shook his head, and said Snake make this River.

I thought otherwise, for these windings break the current and

make it navigable. I have always admired the formations of the

Rivers, as directed by the finger of God for the most benevolent

purposes. At 7 PM we put up in Lake Winepegoos formed by the

waters of this River. It's length is seventeen miles, by about

six miles in width, the principal fish is Sturgeon. The woods

have all day had much Fir, both red and black, the latter very

resinous and much used for torches for night fishing. The At

present known as Lake Winnibigoshish. Acipenser rubicundus Le

Sueur. soil of the Woods is now sandy ; with Points of

alluvial, on which are Oaks and other hard woods, and the bays

have White Cedar, Birch and Larch. On leaving the Lake the

valley of the River appeared more level. On the 4th at noon put

ashore to observe for latitude and shortly after the River

passing over a fine bottom of gravel, I found the River to be 26

yards wide 2­i­ feet deep by 2f miles an hour. Nine miles below

the Leach River from Leach Lake, southwestward of us comes in,

its size appears equal to this River, which it deepens, but does

not add to it's breadth. For this day the valley of the River is

from half to one mile in width, on each side well wooded with

fine Firs. May 5th. After proceeding two miles saw the first

leaves on the Willows ; the Maple and other Trees are in full

bud, but have no leaves. We came to a Rapid, and a Fall over a

smooth Rock of eight feet descent : the whole is thirteen feet

perpendicular, with a Carrying Place of 263 yards. Six miles

further the Meadow River from the north eastward joins, it's size

and water equal to this, the Mississippe, which is now fifty to

sixty yards in breadth. We met a Man wounded in the shoulder, in

a quarrel with an other Man, his Wife was paddling the Canoe ; it

appeared jealousy was the cause. On the 6th May we continued our

route : in the course of the day we met an Indian and his Wife.

The man had a large fresh scar across his nose, and when smoking

with us, asked if he was not still handsome ; on arriving at Sand

Lake we learned that the evening before, while drinking, another

Indian had quarrelled with him, and in a fit of jealousy had bit

off his nose and thrown it away, but in the morning finding his

nose was missing, he searched for, and found it, the part that

remained was still bleeding, on which he stuck the part bitten

off, without any thing to keep it ; it adhered, and 1 Thuja

occidentalis Linn. Larix laricina (Du Roi). taking a

looking glass, he exclaimed, " as yet I am not ugly." I was

afterwards informed, the cure became complete, and only the scar

remained. The Swan River from the north eastward fell in with a

bold stream of water. In the after­ noon at 5 PM we arrived at

the mouth of the Sand Lake River, a short distance above which I

measured the Mississippe River ; 62 yards in width ; 1 2 feet in

depth ; at 4 yards from the shore 10 feet, at two yards 8 feet in

depth, by full two miles an hour. The mouth of the Sand Lake

River is in Latitude 46 . 49 . 1 1 N Longitude 93 . 45 . 7 W and

from the Red Cedar Lake S 48 E 68 miles. As the Mississippe is

the most magnificent River, and flows through the finest

countries of North America, I shall endeavour to explain the

peculiar formation of its head waters. From the Turtle to the Red

Cedar Lake, the passage was too much obstructed by ice to allow

me to form a correct idea of it's windings ; but from the latter

Lake to the mouth of the Sand Lake River there was no ice ; From

the Red Cedar Lake to the latter river is 68 miles direct

distance ; to perform which, four hands in a light Canoe paddled

forty three hours and thirteen minutes. Of this direct distance

ten miles were Lake, leaving fifty eight miles of River ; and

allowing three hours and thirteen minutes for passing the Lake ;

forty hours remain. Four hands in a light Canoe before a current

of two, and at times two and a half miles an hour, will proceed,

at least five miles an hour ; and this rate for forty hours will

give a distance of two hundred miles of the windings of the river

for fifty eight miles in a direct line, being nearly three and a

half miles to one mile. Every mile of these sinuosities of the

River, the current turned to every point of the compass, and it's

direct velocity was diminished, yet continuing to have a steady

current measured at two full miles an hour, must have a descent

of full twenty inches p" mile to maintain this current ; which in

two hundred miles gives a descent or change of level in this

distance of 333 feet 4 inches, equal to a change of level of 3f

feet for each mile in a direct line. Thus the descent from the

Turtle to the Red Cedar Lake is 97! feet, and from this Lake to

the Sand Lake River giving a change of level of 431 feet,

apparently­ through a low country. (Note. Lieutenant Lynch of

the US Navy in his survey of the River Jordan from the Sea of

Tiberias to the Dead Sea says the difference of level of the two

seas is something more than one thousand feet. The distance

between these seas in the direct line of the River is sixty

miles, but the windings of the Jordan increased the distance to

two hundred miles which gives a descent of five feet to a mile.

They descended it in two boats in safety, passing over twenty

seven strong rapids and many lesser to the Dead Sea). To the

intelHgent part of mankind, the scources of all the great rivers

have always been subjects of curiosity ; witness the expeditions

undertaken ; the sums of money expended, and the sufferings

endured to discover the sources of the Nile, the research of

ages. Whatever the Nile has been in ancient times in Arts and

Arms, the noble valley of the Mississippe bids fair to be, and

excluding its pompous, useless. Pyramids and other works ; it's

anglo saxon population will far exceed the Egyptians in all the

arts of civiHzed life, and in a pure religion. Although these are

the predictions of a solitary traveller unknown to the world they

will surely be verified (1798)­ The course and length of the

River Mississippe from it's scource to it's discharge into the

Gulf of Mexico in Latitude 29° o' North Longitude 89 . 10 West is

S 14 E 1344 Miles. This great River including the Missisourie,

drains an extent of 981,034 square geographical miles. In common

average of low water this River discharges 82,000 cubic feet of

water in a second of time ; at this rate it anually places in the

Gulf of Mexico lyQ cubic miles of fresh water ; and including

freshets and steady high water a volume equal to 19 J cubic

miles. On the 6th day of May we arrived at the Sand Lake River,

up which we turn and bend our course for Lake Superior. Since we

left the Red River on the 9 day of April we have not seen the

track of a Deer, or the vestige of a Beaver, not a single Aspin

marked with it's teeth. The Indians we met all appeared very poor

from the animals being almost wholly destroyed in this section of

the country ; their provisions were of wild rice and sugar ; we

did not see a single duck in their canoes, ammunition being too

scarce ; nor did we see a Bow and Arrows with them, weapons

which are in constant use among the Nahathaways for killing all

kinds of fowl ; they were bare footed and poorly dressed. The

Sand Lake River is twenty yards wide, by five feet in depth, at

one and a half miles an hour. It's length two miles to the Sand

Lake, proceeding more than half a mile we came to a trading house

of the North West Company under the charge of Mons" Boiske. Here

were the Women and children of about twenty families, the Men

were all hunting in the Plains on the west side of the

Mississippe to make half dried meat, and procure skins for

leather of the Bison but the meat thus split and dried is very

coarsely done, and to make it something decent, it has to pass

through the hands of the Women. These people can only dress the

hide of the Bison into leather ; but have not the art of dressing

it with the hair on, to make Robes of it, so usefull for cloath-
ing and bedding. As the Men were hunting on what is called the

War Grounds, that is, the debatable lands between them and the

Sieux Indians, the Women were anxiously waiting their arrival.

The night being fine, as usual I was 1 Doubtless the same as

Charles Bousquet or Bousquai, who is men­ tioned by Coues as

having been in the Fond du Lac department about this time.

Elsewhere Thompson speaks of him as " Mons. Buskay." observing

for the Latitude and Longitude of the place ; in the morning an

aged Man, no longer able to hunt came to me, and said, I come on

the part of the Women, for they want to know where the Men are,

are they loaded with meat, and when will they arrive ; I

requested Mons" Boiske to tell him, that I knew nothing of the

matter, and saw only the Moon and Stars. But he took his own view

of the question ; and told him to tell the Women ; the Men are

safe, they will be here tomorrow, each has a load of Meat, but it

is poor, there is no fat on it ; and they must not get drunk

again until the Bisons are fat (August), and who ever bites off

another man's nose, would be killed by the Sieux in the first

battle. Umph, said the old man, while we can get fire water we

will drink it. The Women were pleased, and said all the Men were

fools that drank fire water. He informed me the Women in general

kept themselves sober, and when the men were about to drink they

hid all the Arms, and Knives and left them nothing but their

teeth and fists to fight with. This gentleman, was of the same

opinion with the other Traders, that ardent spirits was a curse

to the Natives, it not only occasioned quarrels, but also revived

old animosities, that had been forgotten. It kept the Indians

poor and was of no use as an article of trade. He showed me his

winter hunt, in value fifty beaver skins. The Minks and

Martens were inferior, the Lynxes appeared good, but the furr

was not so long as in the north. But the Fishers were

uncommonly large, the color a rich glossy black brown, and the

furr fine : The Beaver's were mostly fall and spring skins, and

as each were good in color and furr, but not a single Fox, or

Wolf. These animals are almost unknown, there is nothing for them

to live on. All Lutreola v. letifera (HoUister). Mattes

americana (Turton). ' Lynx canadensis Kerr. Maries

pennanti (Erxleben). his furrs came from the Forests between

the Mississippe and Lake Superior. He had traded i6 Cwt of

Maple Sugar from the Natives ; this was packed in baskets of

birch rind of 28 to 68 lbs each. The Sugar appeared clean and

well made ; that of the Plane Trees, looked like the East India

Sugars, and was much the same in taste : In this article I

have always noticed the supply­ is greater than the demand. The

Men of family that trade here are about forty two, which at seven

souls to each man, is 294. We had now to cross the country to

gain the River S' Louis, and by it descend to Lake Superior. Our

Provisions were four pieces of dried bison meat ; four beaver

tails and two quarts of swamp cranberries, they were the largest

I had ever seen, being about the size of a small hazel nut.

This trading house is in Latitude 46 . 46 . 30 N Longitude 93 .

44 . 17 West Variation 6 degrees East. On the y'" May went over

the Sand Lake of four miles in length, by about one mile in width

to Savannah Brook, up which we proceeded eight geo. miles of

which i mile is a large Pond, but the windings lengthen the

Brook to thirteen miles, to a great Swamp of 4­i­ miles across it

in a N 81 E direction, the latter part of what may be termed bog

; over which we passed by means of a few sticks laid lengthways,

and when we shpped off we sunk to our waists, and with difficulty

regained our footing on the sticks. No Woods grow on this great

Swamp, except scattered pine shrubs of a few feet in height ; yet

such as it was, we had to carry our Canoe and all our things. And

all the furrs, provisions, baggage and Canoes of the Mississippe

have to be carried on their way to the Depot on Lake Superior,

and likewise all the goods for the winter trade. It is a sad

piece of work. The Person in charge of the brigade ; crosses it

as fast as he can, leaves the Men to take their own time, who

flounce along Oxycoccus macrocarpus (Ait.). with the packs

of furrs, or pieces of goods, and " sacre " as often as they

please. Heavy Canoes cannot be carried over but at great risque

both to the Men and Canoes, and the Company have Canoes at each

end. This great Swamp, extended as far as we could see northward

and southward, and I could not learn it's termination either way.

It appears to be somewhat like a height of land between the

Mississippe and the River S' Louis, as from it's west side it

sends a brook into the former ; and from it's east side a brook

into the latter. With an extra Man to help us, it took us a long

day to get all across it. At the east end I observed for Latitude

and Longitude which gave Latitude 46 . 52 . 3 N Longitude 92

. 28 . 42 W Variation 6 degrees east. We now entered a Brook of

seven feet wide, three feet deep, by two miles an hour, and

descended it for twelve miles, but it's windings will extend it

to twenty miles, in which distance it receives one brook from the

south­ ward, and two from the northward, which increased it to

ten yards wide, seven feet deep by if miles an hour. We now

entered the River S' Louis, a bold stream of about one hundred

yards in width by eight feet in depth, the current three miles an

hour. Having descended the River 4 Miles we put up at 7f pm. We

have been all day in the Forests that surrounded Lake Superior.

The Brook of today has many wind fallen trees across it, which we

had to cut away. In several places we saw the marks of beaver for

the first time. On examining a Swan we shot, it had thirteen

eggs, from the size of a pea to that of a walnut, yet I do not

remember ever seeing more than nine young ones with them. The

Woods we have passed are a few Oaks of moderate size, some Ash,

but the principal part Maple, Plane," White Birch, Poplar and

Aspin ; on the low grounds. Pine and Larch. Hitherto the width,

depth and rate of current of the Brooks ' Olor buccinator

(Richardson). Ash­leaved Maple, Acer negundo Linn. and

Rivers are those of high water from the melting of the snow. But

as all of them, even the Red River, depend on the Snow and Rains

for their supply of water ; in the months of August, September

and October they are all shoal. The Men who have navigated these

streams for several years are now with me, and they assure me

that this river (S' Louis) bold and deep as it now is, in the

above months has only eighteen inches of depth, running among

stones which they are often obliged to turn aside to make a

passage for their canoes. In the night we heard a Beaver playing

about us, flapping his broad tail on the water, with a noise as

loud as the report of a small pistol, which was a novelty to

us. Upon descending the first rapids, and proceeding down-
wards, the Men were surprised to find the marks on the trees, to

which they were accustomed to tie the Canoes at their meals, to

be from six to eight feet above the present level of the River

This may be accounted for, by our being on this river about a

month more early than usual, and the sharp night frosts

preventing the melting of the snow on the heights and interiour

of Lake Superior. This River has many rapids, on one of which the

waves filled the Canoe half full of water ; These were succeeded

by a Cataract of small low steeps of a full mile in length round

a point of rock, across which we made a carrying place of 1576

yards. Four miles further, of almost all rapids ; we came to the

Long Carrying Place of seven miles in length. On our left the

River descends the lower heights by a series of low falls, ending

with a steep fall, estimated at 120 feet in height, below which

the River flows with a moderate current into Lake Superior. The

surface rock of the country is a slaty sand stone, very good for

sharpening knives and axes. Near the mouth of the River is a

Trading House of the North West Company under the charge of

Mons"" Lemoine ; his returns were 600 lbs of Furrs with the

expectation of trading 400 lbs more 9 kegs of gum from the Pine

Trees for the Canoes and 12 Kegs, each of ten gallons, of Sugar.

This House is in Latitude 46 . 44 . 33 N Longitude 92 . 9 . 45 W

Variation 4­i­ degrees East. I have only set down my observations

made at certain places, but they are numerous all over the

survey, as every clear day and night, no opportunity was ommitted

of taking observa­ tions for Latitude, Longitude and Variation to

correct the courses and distances of the survey. The Canoes that

descend the River to the upper end of the Long Carrying Place,

are carefully laid up, and there left, in like manner the Canoes

that come from the Lake are left at the lower end. We found three

large Canoes, and a north Canoe of 28 feet in length, much

broken. This was too large for us, but we had no choice, we

repaired it, and as we had only three men fitted it up with two

oars, which have the force of four paddles, as we had now to

encounter the Winds and waves of Lake Superior. The Natives

that trade at this House are about thirty Men of family, and are

about 210 souls. In Winter, from the poverty of the country they

can barely live, and a small stock of sugar is part of their

support. Deer are almost un­ known, and they are suppHed with

leather, as with other necessaries. In the open season their

support is by fishing, for which the spear is much in use. Their

canoes are about fifteen feet in length by three feet in breadth,

and flat bottomed ; With a Woman or a Lad to paddle and steer

the canoe, the Indian with his long spear, stands on the

gunwales at the bar behind the bow, and ticklish as the canoe is,

and the Lake almost always somewhat agitated, he preserves his

upright posture, as if standing on a rock. On the Lake,

especially in the fore part of the day, a low fog rises on

the surface of the water, caused by the coldness of the water

and the higher temperature of the air ; which hides the Canoe ;

and only the Indian Man, with his poised spear Odocoileus v.

borealis (Miller). E, A, P. ready to strike is seen, like a

ghost gliding slowly over the water. I haye sometimes amused

myself for twenty minutes with the various appearances this low

fog gives to these fishermen. As the elevation of the Scource of

the Mississippe is a subject of curiousity to all intelligent

men, especially to those of the United States, to whom this noble

River belongs, I shall continue my estimated calculations to

determine its level above that of the Sea in the gulph of

Mexico. From the Mississippe River to the mouth of the Sand

Lake River ; by this River and the Savannah Brook there is an

ascent of l6 ft 3 Inches to the great Morass, which may be taken

as level. From the east side of this Morass a Brook descends to

the River S' Louis, by it's windings of twenty miles, at 12

Inches p" mile is 20 feet, giving to the Mississippe an elevation

of 3 feet 9 inches above this part of the River S Louis. The

descent of this River to Lake Superior is 34 miles of strong

current at 20 inches p"" mile, gives 56 feet 8 inches. 11 miles

of strong Rapids at 5 feet p" mile, equal to 55 feet of descent.

One full mile of low Falls having a Carrying Place ; and a

descent of twenty feet. One Carry­ ing Place of 7 miles ; the

Falls 20 feet p"" mile equal to 140 feet to which add the last

fall of 120 feet in height equal to 260 feet. Then 21 miles of

current at 15 inches p"" mile equal to 26 feet 3 inches, giving

to the above part of the River S Louis a descent of 417 feet 11

inches to Lake Superior. This Lake, by the levels taken to it's

east end is 625 feet above the tide waters of the S' Lawrence

River, Hence we have from the Sea to Lake Superior an ascent of

levels of 625 feet ; The ascent to the Morass Brook, of the River

S' Louis 418 feet ; and difference of level of the Mississippe 3

feet 9 Inches, giving a total of 1046 feet 9 inches of this last

River above the level of the Sea, at the Mouth of the Sand Lake

River ; and from hence to the Turtle Lake, by the calculation

already made 431 feet ; equal to 1478 feet ; the elevation of

the Turtle Lake, the scource of the Mississippe, above the Sea.

It is tedious to the reader to attend to these calculations and

yet to the enquiring mind they are necessary that he may know the

ground on which they are based. For the age of guessing is passed

away, and the traveller is expected to give his reasons for what

he asserts. To take the levels of several hundred miles of Rivers

is too expensive, unless there is some great object in view, and

all that the pubHc can expect, or obtain, in these almost unknown

countries, are the estimates of experienced men. On Lake

Superior a Volume could be written ; I have been twice round it,

and six times over a great part, each survey correcting the

preceding. The last survey of this Lake was under the orders of

the Foreign Office for to determine, and settle the Boundary

Line, between the Dominions of Great Britain and the Territories

of the United States. The Courses were taken by the Compass, and

the Distances by Massey's Patent Log, the latter so exact, as to

require very little correction. The many astronomical

observations made have settled the exact place of the Shores of

this great Lake : the Maps of which, with the Boundary Line are

in the Foreign Office in London ; and also in the Office of the

United States at Washington, and are not published. The River St

Louis flows into it's west end ; and the discharge of the Lake is

at it's south east corner, by the Falls of S Maries, which are

in Latitude 46 . 31 . 16 North Longitude 84 . 13 . 54 W. giving

the straight course and distance, S 89 E 383 Miles, it's breadth

increases from the west to the east end, to 176 miles. It has two

great bays on it's east side, across which are many Islands. The

shores of the south side are 671 miles, and 1 The best

information available indicates that Thompson was only 56 feet in

error. James White. These maps have since been published in

J. B. Moore, History and Digest of International Arbitraiions,

Washington, 1895. those of the north and east sides 946 miles,

being a circuit of 161 7 miles It's area is about 28,090 square

miles. It's level above the Sea is 625 feet. It's depth is as yet

unknown, even near the shores of Pye Island and the head land

Thunder Bay ; it has been sounded with 350 fathoms of Line, and

no bottom found and this by men experienced in taking sound-
ings. Supposing it's greatest depth to be only 400 fathoms equal

to 2400 feet, it's bottom is 1775 feet below the surface of the

Ocean." Taking it's area at 28,090 square miles and its average

depth at 200 fathoms, this Lake contains 5930 cubic miles of

fresh water. All summer the water tastes very cold, and in winter

only the bays, and around the Islands are frozen, which the waves

of the frequent gales of wind break up, and cause much floating

ice. In easterly or westerly gales of wind the roll of it's waves

are like those of the sea . When surveying this Lake in the year

1822 on the north side about fifty miles eastward of S' Louis

River, about i pm we put ashore to dine, the day clear and fine

and the Lake perfectly calm : as we were sitting on the Rocks,

about a full mile from us direct out in the Lake suddenly there

arose an ebullition of the water ; its appearance was that of a

body of water thrown up from some depth. It was about thirty

yards in length by four feet in height, it's breadth we could not

see, from within this the water was thrown up about ten feet in

very small columns as seen through our glasses. To the eye it

appeared like heavy rain ; the Lake became agitated, the waves

rolled on the shore ; and we had to secure the Canoes, this

lasted for about half an hour. I took a sketch of it ; when it

subsided, the waves still continued ; and we were for three hours

unable to proceed. During this time and the whole day the wind

was calm. On the western part of the south shore, the rock is

mostly of Sandstone as 1 Its elevation is 602 feet. Its maximum

depth is 1,000 feet, nearly 400 feet below mean sea­level. are

also the Islands ; some of the cliffs are much worn by the waves,

and have heaps of debris : the Islands are in the same state. One

of them is worn through, and in calm weather a canoe and men can

pass with the arch three feet above their heads. Along the

shore, proceeding eastward the limestone appears and continues

and seems everywhere to underlay the sandstone. Everywhere the

land rises boldly from the Lake shore, and at the distance of

about fifteen miles are crowned by the Porcupine hills, lying

parallel to the Lake and the elevation of the land appears to be

full 2500 feet above the Lake ; the whole has the appearance of a

continuous Forest, and so far as the eye can judge may be

cultivated. The north and east sides of this Lake are very

different from the south side ; they rise abruptly in rude

rounded shaped rock rolhng back to the height of 850 to 2000 feet

above the Lake ; at a distance they appear to be one Forest but a

nearer approach shows many a place of bare rock. The whole extent

of the 946 miles of this coast is of the granitic order, in all

the varieties that quartz, feltspar and mica can form with the

materials and offers a fine field for the geologist and mineralo-
gist ; but in all this distance were ten Farmers to search for a

place where each could have a lot of 200 acres of good land along

side of each other I do not think they would find it. In the

north east corner of the Lake there is much Basalt, the only

place in which I have seen this mineral on the east side of the

Mountains. In this corner is Thunder Bay, so named by the Natives

from it's frequent occurrence. Off the west point is Pye Island,

so named from it's shape, it is of Basalt, part of this Island

has perpendicular sides of at least 100 feet in height ; close to

which, the Lake has been sounded with 350 fathoms of lead line

and no bottom found ; We may conclude the depth of the Lake

to be here 400 fathoms, which will give the Basalt walls of the

Island 2500 feet in height. The east end of the Bay is Thunder

Point, rising 1 1 20 feet above the surface of the water, which

has been several times sounded without finding the bottom ;

giving to the Lake the same depth as at Pye Island. This Basalt

Point has a height of 3520 feet ; Great part of it is finely

fluted, and the edges of their concaves fine and sharp ; and the

waves of the Lake seem to have no effect on it, though exposed to

all their force, indeed the Basalt walls of both places appear as

fresh and firm as if Providence had placed them there only a few

years ago. From the west end of the Lake by the north and east

sides to the Falls of S Maries are thirty one Rivers, of which

the S' Louis the Mishipacoton and the Neepego, are about 1 50

yards in width ; the others from thirty to sixty yards wide, and

twenty eight Brooks. On the south side there are forty Rivers two

of these 150 yards in width the others from twenty to seventy

yards, and forty one Brooks. All of these Rivers and Brooks are

fed by the Rain and snow, and by the evaporation from this great

Lake which rests upon the surrounding high Lands, and is not

wafted beyond them. From the heights of these lands all the above

Streams rush down in a series of Rapids and Falls, with some

intervals of moderate current, as they pass over a table land. On

the south side the River Ontonoggan (the native name) has from

old times been noted for the pieces of pure copper found there,

of which the Indians made their weapons before the arrival of the

French ; and afterwards for the services of the Churches.

Learning from my Men that a short distance up the River there was

a large Mass of Copper, we left our canoe and pro­ ceeded on foot

to it ; we found it lying on a beach of lime­ stone at the foot

of a high craig of the same ; it's shape round, the upper part a

low convex, all worn quite smooth by the attrition of water and

ice, but now lying dry. We tried to cut a chip from it, but it

was too tough for our small axe. (Note. This mass of pure copper

has since been taken to Washington at the expense of 5000

dollars, and found to weigh 3000 lbs by information.) At the

extremity of the great Point called by the Natives Keewewoonanoo

(We return) now shortened to Keewenow, in a small harbour we

took pieces of copper ore. I named it Copperass harbour. Both at

this place, at the above River and a few other places I learn the

people of the United States for these three years (1848) have

worked the Copper Mines with considerable profit ; and have also

found much silver. It is not easy to conceive of the vast

quantity of alluvial of all kinds brought down by seventy one

Rivers and sixty nine Brooks rushing down these high lands, that

surround the Lake, the accumulation of centuries must be very

great yet such is the depth of the Lake, not a single River shows

a point of alluvial worth notice. (Note. In the Province of

Auvergne in France, there appears to have been a Lake of the size

of Lake Superior, the barriers of which appear to have been

broken down by an earthquake, and the Lake emptied. One aUuvial

from a River destroyed at the same time, was computed to be nine

hundred feet in height from the bottom of the Lake. This

catastrophe must have happened previous to the time of Julius

Caser, for had it happened in his time, or since, the Roman

historians would have noticed such an event. Saussave.) The

northern part of North America is noted for it's numerous and

large Lakes far more than any other part of the world. The

Great Architect said " Let them be, and they were " but he has

given to his creature the power to 1 This mass of copper, stated

on the label to weigh about three tons, is still in the U.S.

National Museum at Washington, D.C. It was observed by Alexander

Henry the elder in 1 766, and had then long been known to the

Indians. In 1841 Julius Eldred, having purchased it from the

Chippewa, took it to Detroit, where it was exhibited. In 1843 it

was claimed by the Gkjvemment and taken to Washington. It

remained in charge of the War Department until i860, when it was

transferred to the Smithsonian Institution. By an Act of

Congress, Eldred was awarded the sum of $5,664.98 to reimburse

him for his expenses in connection with it. examine his works

on our globe ; and perhaps learn the order in which he has placed

them. If we examine the positions of all these Lakes, their

greatest lengths will be found to be about between North and

thirty degrees west, and South and thirty degrees east, which are

the Hnes of direction of the east side of the Great Plains, and

of the Rocky Mountains : the anomaHes to this order are Lakes

Michigan, Superior and Athabasca. The west sides of the Lakes are

of Limestone and the east sides of Granite. Between these two

forma­ tions are the great wide chasms, or valleys filled with

water, which are the Lakes. And the three above Lakes, although

lying west and east, have their south sides of Limestone and

their north sides of the granitic order, and their deep waters in

their same kind of valley. The few Lakes that lie as it were

within the east side of the Great Plains, as Cumberland and the

Cedar Lakes are wholly within the Limestone forma­ tion, and are

comparatively shoal water Lakes. Having settled by observations

the Latitude and Longi­ tude of the trading house of S' Louis's

River at the west end of Lake Superior ; on the 1 2 nd of May we

proceeded to survey the south side of the Lake. In the afternoon

we came to four Lodges of Chipaways. They had just arrived from

the interior, having wintered at the west end of the Porcupine

HiUs and now pass the summer on the borders of the Lake to

maintain themselves by fishing. They are about 28 families, and

by the usual rule of seven souls to a family their number is 196

persons. My Men thought, for the number of Men, there were more

old Women than usual. Although the interior rises high, yet near

the Lake the shores are low, with many fine sandy beaches, for

setting of nets for fishing ; yet the Natives make no use of

them, although they see the success of the white men : If a net

is given to them, they are too indolent to take care of it, and

it soon becomes useless. They prefer the precarious mode of

spearing fish, which is practicable only in calm, or very

moderate weather. The woods seen from the Lake were of white and

red Birch, Spruce Pines," Larch and Aspins, all of small growth.

The next day we passed an Island of Sand Stone which the Waves

had worn into rude arches, with many caves. The next day we came

to three Lodges containing fifteen families, being 105 souls. An

American of the States was living with them, and had adopted

their way of life in preference to hard labor on a farm. In the

afternoon we passed Mons'' Michel Cadotte with five men and

several Lodges of the natives from their winter quarters, now to

live by fishing. The night and morning of the 15'" May was a

severe frost. The Land all day very high and bold shores. Having

gone eleven miles we came to the Montreal River of 25 yards in

width, between banks of rock ; near the Lake is a Fall of 30 feet

in height. The course of this River is through the Porcupine

Hills the lower parts of which are now the coasts of the Lake ;

Two of my Men had wintered near the head of this River. As the

whole length of the River is a series of Falls between steep

banks of rock the distance from the Lake to the House was one

continued Carrying Place of 130 rests. (A Rest, or Pose, is the

distance the cargo of the canoe is carried from place to place

and then rest.) In this hilly country a Rest may be from five to

six hundred yards, and the 130 rests about forty miles. The men

say the distance takes them thirty seven days of carrying to the

House. All the trading Houses on the south side of the Lake

require many miles of carrying, with some intervals of current to

take the cargo of the canoe to the wintering ground. The Men who

winter and have to traverse the country in every direction, say

the Lakes are few and small, more like beaver ponds than Lakes ;

and that in very many places sandstone for sharpening ' Betula

papyri/era Marsh, and probably the Yellow Birch, Betula lutea

Michx. Probably White Spruce, Picea canadensis (Mill.). '

This was a brother of Baptiste Cadotte, who was in charge of the

trading post on Red Lake river mentioned on p. 252. knives and

axes are to be found. We came to a lodge of five families, they

had seen no person for eight Moons, and had all their winters

hunt with them, of about 360 pounds of furrs. Further on was a

lodge of ten families. Early on the 17" May we came to the Fair

River at the east end of the Porcupine Hills. The interior

country has now lower land. The Woods hitherto have much white

Cedar, with Birch, Aspin and Pine, with a few Maple and Plane

Trees, all of very common growth. An extensive body of ice lying

before us, we had to put ashore and pass the day. We set a net

but caught only six Carp. The wind having drifted the ice from

the shore, early on the 18''' we set oif and soon came to the

Ontonoggan River, where lay the great mass of Copper I have

already mentioned. Here was a M' Cadotte with four Lodges of

Indians, he informed us that last summer (1797) a party of

Americans had visited the River and proceeded twenty miles up it

to the Forks of the River, they had promised the Indians to come

this summer (1798) and build a Fort and work the mines, for

which the Chippaways were waiting for them, but this promise

they did not perform until the year 1845. M' Cadotte had a few

goods remaining and requested a passage with us for himself and

goods which we gave him and he embarked with us. Full twenty

five miles North eastward of the Ontonoggan River are high steep

rocks of a reddish color, which have the most distant Echo I have

ever heard. We stopped a short time to amuse ourselves with it :

The Rocks were about 200 feet in height and the place of the Echo

appeared about sixty feet above us ; The Echo of the words we

spoke, seemed more sharp and clear than our voices and somewhat

louder. 1 Thuja occidentalis Linn. 2 Acer saccharum

Marsh. ' Acer negundo Linn. Catostomus commersonii

(Lacepede). One of the Men, Francois Babue, who had been many

years in the furr trade of the Lake used to abuse the Echo until

he worked himself into a violent passion ; did the same this time

until his expressions becoming too coarse, we moved off, he

swearing, that he thought it very hard he never could have the

last word. The greater part of this day we were in much danger

from the Ice, which lay in the Lake a short distance from the

shore ; had it come in we could not have saved ourselves as the

rocks were high and steep. At ji pm we put up on Keewenaw

Carrying Place ; This is a remark­ able place, being an Isthmus

of 2000 yards, in a south course and forms a body of Land in

circuit 94 Miles into a Peninsula : known under the name of Point

Keewenaw. The bank is about twenty feet in height; the first 11

00 yards is good ground ; the other 960 yards a perfect swamp. To

avoid going round this Peninsula of high land the people of the

States in time to come will cut a Canal through the Isthmus, at a

small expence, as a Lock is not required. ' The night being

clear, as usual, I observed for Latitude and Longitude the former

47 . 14. 27 N. Longitude 88° 38' 36" West. From the Carrying

Place is a Brook of 1­5 mile to a small Lake, and then a kind of

Lagoon of 24 miles to Lake Superior. Part of the Lagoon, on one

side the Woods were on fire, the heat and smoke made us lay by

for a few hours. On the 22"" and 24' of May we had heavy rain

with vivid Lightning and loud Thunder. The provisions we had to

live on were hulled Corn, part of a bag of wild rice, with a few

pounds of grease to assist the boihng. It is customary after

supper, to boil corn or rice for the meals of next day, and in

good weather we set off by 4 am, the Kettles were taken off the

fire in a boiling state and placed in the Canoe, and two hours

afterwards we had a warm breakfast ; If Lightning and Thunder

came in the day the Corn became 1 This prediction has since been

fulfilled by the construction of the Portage Lake canal. sour

and had to be thrown away ; but the rice never soured : the same

thing in the night, when the kettle had corn it was soured, but

if of rice it kept good : the Men assured me that the Lightning

and Thunder had no effect on the wild rice ; and that in the

heats of Summer the Corn soured so fre­ quently, they were half

starved ; to boil a Kettle of corn requires three to four hours.

The rice is cooked in half an hour, but it is very weak food. All

the Corn for these voyages has to be steeped in hot lye of wood

ashes to take off the rind of the grain. On the zS'" May we

arrived. Thank God at the Falls of S Maries, the discharge of

Lake Superior, and the head of the River S Lawrence, which flows

into Lake Huron. Here I had the pleasure of meeting Sir

Alexander M'Kenzie the celebrated traveller who was the first to

follow down the great stream of water flowing northward from the

Slave Lake into the Arctic Sea, and which great River bears his

name, and was made well known to the public by the journey of

Sir John Franklin. Upon my report to him of the surveys I had

made and the number of astronomical Observations foi Latitude,

Longitude and Variation of the Compass, he was pleased to say I

had performed more in ten months than he expected could be done

in two years. The next day the Honorable William M'GilHvray

arrived. These gentlemen were the Agents, and principal Partners

of the North West Company : they requested me to continue the

survey of the Lake round the east and north sides to the Grand

Portage, then the Depot of the company. The survey we had

finished was of the south side, from the west, to the east end ;

follow­ ing the shores, the distance is 671 miles, but the direct

line is only 383 miles. We had met with no families, and

allowing twenty families not seen, will give 130 families. M"

Cadotte, who has been for many years a Trader in these parts,

thought 125 families to be nearer the number. Allow­ ing these

Natives to have possession of hunting ground only to the distance

of 70 miles from the Lake, the extent will be 26,810 square

miles, and this divided by 130 will give to each family an extent

of 206 square miles of hunting ground ; yet with this wide area ;

the annual average hunt of each family of all kinds of furrs,

from the Bear down to the Musk Rat, will not exceed sixty to

seventy skins in trade ; allowing a Bear skin to be the value of

two beavers ; and eight to ten musk Rats to be the value of one

beaver. Deer are so scarce that all they kill does not furnish

leather for their wants, and when the mild seasons come they all

descend to Lake Superior to live by fishing. Calculation is

tedious reading, yet without it, we cannot learn the real state

of any country. (Note. M' Ballantyne of the Hudson's Bay Company

has lately published a work, with the title of " Six years

residence in Hudson's Bay," in which, speaking of the Bay, he

says " the interior has Myriads of wild animals." The Natives

will thank him to show them where they are. When he wrote those

words he must have been thinking of Musketoes, and in this

respect he was right.) The Forests of the Lake are such as has

been already described ; I could not learn that any of the Forest

Trees acquired a growth to merit particular notice, except the

white Birch, the Rind of which is very good for canoes, and of a

large size. On the first day of June we left the Falls of S'

Maries and from thence surveyed the east and part of the north

shores of Lake Superior to the 11th day of this month, when late

we arrived at the Grand Portage, then the Depot of the North

West Company, to which the furrs of the interiour country came,

and from whence the merchandise was taken for the furr trade to

about the same time the following year, as already described. The

Falls of St Maries is a rapid of about three fourths of a mile in

length in which it descends eleven Fiber zibethicus (Linn.).

feet/ and then by three channels of easy current descends to Lake

Huron. The carrying place is about a mile in length of low wet

ground, very easy for a canal and locks, and which at length is

about to be completed in this year of i84 8 The opposite bank

of these rapids belong to the United States, it is steep and

above twenty feet in height, and a canal could not be made but at

enormous expence. While wait­ ing for the Province of Canada

to make a canal on the only side in which it can be made, these

enterprising people made a deep channel at the foot of their

steep bank with a tow path for their Vessels, but the strength of

the current makes the passage somewhat dangerous. This canal

they will now do away with. The mines of copper ore that have

been worked both by the citizens of the United States and the

people of this province now demand a canal which otherwise would

not have been made, although the fisheries of Lake Superior

required a canal many years ago, but as yet, only the people of

the States are engaged in these fisheries, although superior to

that of any other which is always the case with deep water.

Eighteen feet ; now increased to about nineteen and a half feet

by the dredging of the St. Mary river below the Sault.